
ViewMTN
-------

A web interface to monotone. See "LICENSE" for distribution terms.
ViewMTN is Copyright 2005 Grahame Bowland.

The minimum version of monotone required is: 0.24

For the graphs to work you'll need dotty installed - it is a 
part of GraphViz.
     http://www.research.att.com/sw/tools/graphviz/

ViewMTN requires mod_python.
	http://www.modpython.org/

When installing be sure to copy config.py.example to config.py, and 
then edit config.py (paying attention to the comments!)

Common issues
-------------

If you are getting a 404 error for "getfile.py", make sure that you have
updated ".htacess" to include the following line.
	PythonHandler wrapper
"wrapper.py" contains several Python functions which are called
for various pages that do not need to go through mod_python's PSP
framework. The above line causes all page requests to go through
wrapper.py, which decides which function (or PSP file) should be called
to handle the request.

(Note: recent versions of ViewMTN will not work at all if you are missing 
 the line above.)

MacOS
-----

I run ViewMTN on MacOS by using mod_python and apache2 compiled from source 
using Darwin Ports:
      http://darwinports.opendarwin.org/
You should be able to install graphviz from Darwin Ports as well.

The graphs seem to look terrible with the default fault from config.py.example; 
I set the font to "Monaco" instead and it looks pretty good.

Bugs, suggestions, feedback
---------------------------

Send any bugs, suggestions or feedback to:
  Grahame Bowland <grahame@angrygoats.net>
  PO BOX 3105, Broadway, Nedlands WA 6009 Australia

In particular, please look at the TODO file. If you're interested in
fixing any of the issues listed (or just adding extra TODO entries)
please go ahead - perhaps let me know so I can keep track and let you 
know if the item is already done but not committed.

As monotone is a distributed version control system, feel free to 
grab a copy of viewmtn, commit to your local DB, etc. If you want to 
send me your commits, email me (or catch me in #monotone) and we'll 
work something out.

