How to prepare a mtn-browse-m.nn.tar.gz distribution:

1) Update software. Update the version number in lib/perl/Globals and update
   the "About" dialog details in mtn-browse if necessary to include additional
   contributors etc.

2) Update the ChangeLog with the update history taken from Monotone. Only
   dedupe entries or remove entries that negate one another so that we only
   list net changes (e,g, remove things like "Added X." followed by "Removed X
   because it didn't work."). All other entries stay, grouped and sorted on
   significance.

3) Likewise update the NEWS file. However this time break changes into New
   Changes and Bugs Fixed. Keep entries high level and user centric so no need
   to go into all of the gory details.

4) Update the README file with any relevant details. The most likely will be
   version related, what files get installed and where (shown in the text art
   listing), installation changes such as extra switches and dependency details
   (especially with respect to the Monotone::AutomateStdio module).

5) Run generate-pot-file and update the locale/mtn-browse.pot file.

6) Clean up and check all your changes in, making sure mtn-browse is not in its
   installed state (check the BEGIN block at the top of the file).

7) Generate the tar ball by doing the following:

   - Generate the HTML help files in the locale/help directories by using the
     following command in each locale directory:

         xsltproc /usr/share/sgml/docbook/yelp/db2html.xsl mtn-browse.xml

   - Get the latest stable version of the Monotone::AutomateStdio module and
     place the one pm and one pod file under lib/perl/Monotone (you will need
     to create the Monotone directory). Make sure permissions are consistent
     with other files and directories (which they should be).

   - Remove unneeded files by doing the following:

         rm -rf .mtn-ignore _MTN artwork devl-install distro-readme \
                generate-pot-file

   - Rename the parent directory from mtn-browse to mtn-browse-m.nn. Where m
     and nn are the major and minor version numbers of the release.

   - Create the compressed tar ball by doing:

         tar cvzf mtn-browse-m.nn.tar.gz ./mtn-browse-m.nn

Tony.
